Red rust disease:
    Description:
	    Red rust is a fungal disease that affects many plants in flower gardens. It can be bright red, orange, yellow, or brown in color

	Symptoms of Rust Fungi:

	    The signature symptom of rust is the orange, yellow, brown, or red spore masses on the outside of the plant. This color gives the rust fungus its name. These spores appear as raised dots on the leaves or stems of the plant. Some types of rust form galls that then become covered in the spore masses. Rust occasionally forms on blooms. Symptoms occur from the ground up. They are usually on the underside of the leaves but may also appear on the top of them. It may cause witches broom growth (redish, twisted stems and leaves), cankers, oozes, and spotted needles. Rust may cause leaves to fall prematurely. If enough of the leaves fall, the plant may die. Plants may be stunted, off color, and weak. Plants that are heavily affected for 2-3 years in a row may die if not treated. A bad case of rust does not leave enough green areas on the leaf for significant photosynthesis to occur, and the plant starves. Rust may occur on the bark or needles of conifers. It may cause witches broom growth (redish, twisted stems and leaves), cankers, oozes, and spotted needles.

	Preventing Rust Fungus:

	    It is very difficult to prevent rust fungus in your garden because it appears in such a wide variety of plants. However, there are some cultural things you can do to lower the chance your plant gets rust.

	    1. Buy rust-resistant cultivars:

	        Not all plants that get rust have rust-resistant cultivars. When possible, however, you should buy rust-resistant cultivars. Be sure you look for those in seed catalogs. This information is also on the seed packets of resistant varieties. The little tags in potted plants you get from the nursery should have that information on them, too.

	    2. Check plants before bringing them home:

	        Only buy plants from a local and reputable nursery. The plants there will be better quality and less apt to be diseased. Before buying a plant at a nursery, check under the leaves of the plant and around the base of it. If you see any spots on the leaves or stem, don’t buy the plant. Find another plant to purchase. You do not want to introduce rust into your landscape if you can help it.

	    How do you treat rust fungus?:

	        Inspect your plants frequently, especially at the base of the leaves near the soil. If you find symptoms of rust, you can remove the leaf that it appears on. Don’t remove more than 1/3 of the leaves at one time. Once you find rust in a vulnerable species, you will need to treat it to save that plant and others of the same species in your landscape.

	    Chemical treatments:

	        Chemical fungicides should be used in early spring right when new growth appears on the plant or in the fall after leaf drop. Fungicides are not effective after rust symptoms appear. Chemical fungicides have to be repeated every 4-5 weeks while the temperature and moisture are conducive to the fungus. After the weather warms up, rust cannot reproduce even if it is present in the plant, so you can stop the treatments.

	        Before using a fungicide, be sure the label mentions the name of your plant or family of plants on it. Obey all the directions and warnings on the label. Remember, the label is the law. Wear long sleeves, long pants, and closed-toe shoes to use any chemical, including organic ones. Be sure to change clothes after you use the fungicide so you don’t track it into the house.

	        Fungicides can be expensive, so determine the value of the plants you want to protect. A very low level of rust in a full landscape can probably be controlled by removing infected leaves without having to use fungicides. If the plant is a high value plant, then it may be worth it to administer a fungicide. The same is true if the alternate host to a rust infecting a high value plant cannot be removed.

	        There are many different synthetic antifungals around. Your Extension agent can recommend some if you want to take that route. If you want to use an organic anti-fungal, you have two choices.

	        1. Copper Fungicides:

	            Copper fungicides can provide control of some rust fungus, depending on the species of rust. Rust fungus has evolved to display resistance to some fungicides, so contact your Extension agent to find out if the rust you have is susceptible to copper.

	        2. Sulfur Fungicides:

	            Sulfur fungicides provide control of rust fungus. As with copper, some rusts may be resistant to this fungicide. Do not apply sulfur after the temperature has warmed up as it will damage the plant.

	Treatment:

        1. Select rust-resistant plant varieties when available.

        2. Pick off and destroy infected leaves and frequently rake under plants to remove all fallen debris.

        3. Water in the early morning hours — avoiding overhead sprinklers — to give plants time to dry out during the day. Drip irrigation and soaker hoses can be used to help keep leaves dry.

        4. Use a slow-release, organic fertilizer on crops and avoid excess nitrogen. Soft, leafy, new growth is most susceptible.

        5. Apply copper sprays or sulfur powders to prevent infection of susceptible plants. For best results, apply early or at first sign of disease. Spray all plant parts thoroughly and repeat every 7-10 days up to the day of harvest.

        6. Effectively treat fungal diseases with SERENADE Garden. This broad spectrum bio-fungicide uses a patented strain of Bacillus subtilis and is approved for organic 	gardening. Best of all, it’s safe to use — you can treat and pick crops the same day!

        7. Containing sulfur and pyrethrins, Bonide® Orchard Spray is a safe, one-hit concentrate for insect attacks and fungal problems. For best results, apply as a 	protective spray (2.5 oz/ gallon) early in the season. If disease, insects or wet weather are present, mix 5 oz in one gallon of water. Thoroughly spray all parts of the plant, especially new shoots.

        8. Prune or stake plants and remove weeds to improve air circulation. Make sure to disinfect your pruning tools (one part bleach to 4 parts water) after each cut.

        9. Use a thick layer of mulch or organic compost to cover the soil after you have raked and cleaned it well. Mulch will prevent the disease spores from splashing back up onto the leaves.

        10. Burn or bag infected plants after the growing season (see Fall Garden Cleanup). Do NOT compost
