Leaf miner
	Description:

		A leaf miner is a small insect that eats the leaf tissue of plants. The larvae of leaf miners, called grubs, tunnel into leaves to create "mines". As grubs feed, they cause the plant to lose healthy leaf tissue and can lead to disease. The plant can't get enough sunlight and may not grow or produce crops.
 Several kinds of insects have developed this habit, including larvae of moths (Lepidoptera), beetles (Coleoptera), sawflies (Hymenoptera) and flies (Diptera).

 	How to Control:

	    1. Monitor plant leaves closely. At the first sign of tunneling, squeeze the leaf at the tunnel between two fingers to crush any larvae. Done soon enough, this killing larvae can allow plants to survive minor outbreaks. Pick off and destroy badly infested leaves in small gardens.

		2. The more healthy the plant, the less chance that leafminers will hurt it. Maintain plant health with organic fertilizers and proper watering to allow plants to outgrow and tolerate pest damage. Keep your soil alive by using compost and other soil amendments.

		3. Use floating row covers (Harvest-Guard) to prevent fly stage from laying eggs on leaves.

		4. The parasitic wasp Diglyphus isaea is a commercially available beneficial insect that will kill leafminer larva in the mine. The wasp is especially beneficial to indoor growers of ornamentals and vegetables.

		5. Use yellow or blue sticky traps to catch egg laying adults. Cover soil under infested plants with plastic mulches to prevent larvae from reaching the ground and pupating.

		6. Safer BioNeem contains azadirachtin, the key insecticidal ingredient found in neem oil. This concentrated spray disrupts growth and development of pest insects and has repellent and antifeedant properties. Best of all, it’s non-toxic to honey bees and many other beneficial insects.

		7. Fast-acting botanical insecticides should be used as a last resort. Derived from plants which have insecticidal properties, these natural pesticides have fewer harmful side effects than synthetic chemicals and break down more quickly in the environment.

	How do you get rid of leaf miners?:

		Leaf miners can be difficult to get rid of because they live between the inside of the leaf. The leaf’s surface shields them from most pesticides. Using Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is your best bet.

		In brief, there are three types of control methods in IPM. Cultural controls are things you do to the plants or the environment to control the predators naturally. Biological controls are usually preditors that you release in the affected area so they can eat the problem. Chemical controls use pesticides to kill the problem. They are generally more expensive than cultural or biological controls and worse for the environment.

		a) Cultural Controls:

			Cultural controls are the preferred method to control leaf miners. They do not hurt the environment as much as chemical controls and are cheaper than buying 		biological or chemical controls. Many of the cultural control methods are things good gardeners do anyway.

			1. Keep your plants in tip-top condition. This is good advice any time, but if your plants are healthy and thriving, they can better withstand the leaf miner damage. Plants that are barely hanging on are more likely to die if they lose a lot of leaves.

			2. Make sure your plants have enough water, as drought stress can really weaken a plant. By the same token, fertilize the plants as recommended to keep them well fed. Healthy plants can withstand more damage and bounce back faster than stressed plants.

			3. Monitor Your Plants:

				Check your plants at least weekly. Leaf miners often attack the first true leaves of a plant. Check the bottom of all the plant leaves for eggs, and crush any that you find. If you find leaf miner tunnels on your leaves, squash the larva at the end of the tunnel. You can remove the infected leaves from the plant if the plant has enough other leaves to manage. Do not remove more than 1/3rd of the leaves on any one plant.

			4. Till the Ground:

				After you remove the last of your fall plants from your garden, till the ground well. This aerates the soil. In addition, tilling will bury and destroy the pupa stage and they will die. This breaks the lifecycle of leafminer and gives your plants a break.

			5. Good Sanitation:

				Good sanitation will help keep leafminer numbers in check. Keep your garden free of weeds that attract leafminers. Remove leaves and plant debris each season. If you have a few leaves with evidence of leafminers, remove and destroy them. Do not compost leaves with leaf miners unless you have a very hot compost pile. In that case, bury the plants and leaves in the hottest part of the pile. Otherwise, place them in a plastic bag, seal the bag, and put it in the trash. Since leaf miners overwinter as pupae, they are not affected by the composting in a cold pile. If you put the infected plants on that kind of compost pile, you will inadvertently spread the pests throughout your garden when you put compost from the pile on the garden beds in the spring.

			6. Decoy Crops:

				If you have a vegetable garden or a flower bed with expensive plants in it and want to protect them, you can plant things that attract leafminers more than the plants you are trying to protect. Plants such as lamb’s quarter, pigweed, henbane, and nightshade make good decoy patches. Put the decoys close enough to the preferred plants that leaf miners can find them, but off to the side. If you have a large garden, a border several feet thick of decoy crops can help stop leaf miner damage. The leaf miners will never reach your plants to damage them or, at the very least, there will be less damage.

			7. Row Covers:

				Row covers provide a physical barrier that prevents the adult leafminers from reaching your plants. A row cover needs to be a cloth such as a cheesecloth that will let in light and rain. This only works if you have had no leafminer problems for a year. Otherwise, the pupae on the ground will hatch inside the row covers, making them worthless.

			8. Crop Rotation:

				Rotate your vegetables in your garden so you do not plant things leaf miners eat in the same place for at least a year. It makes it harder for the leaf miners to find the crops they like and eat them. Remember that a vegetable leaf miner will infest almost any leafy greens, so make sure you don’t rotate another green in that spot, even if it is not the same species. For example, don’t plant beets where spinach has been for at least a year.

		b) Biological Controls:

			Unless there has been widespread indiscriminate spraying in an area, leaf miners should have many natural enemies. If you are having problems with a lack of predators, many organic nursery supply stores stock leaf miner preditors, which you can release in your vegetable garden or flower bed. You will have to tolerate a low level of leafminers or the preditors will starve and won’t be there to help control the problem in the future.

			1. Lacewings:

				Lacewings are aggressive predators of a wide variety of soft-bodied insects such as aphids, mealy bugs, caterpillars, and scale crawlers. They will remove and eat the leaf miner larva from the leaf. Removing the larva does not heal the leaf miner damage in leaves, but will limit future damage.

			2. Parasitoid Wasps:

				There are various species of parasitic wasps, but all of them lay eggs in at least one type of leafminer. When the eggs hatch, the larvae start eating the leaf miner from the inside out. When they have finished growing, the larvae chew out of the now-dead leaf miner larva. You can encourage parasitoid wasps by planting flowers such as dill, fennel, or yarrow that have clumps of flowers with nectar and pollen for the adult wasps to feed on. Make sure you do not spray these plants with any pesticide or you will kill the natural predators on these plants.

			3. Beneficial Nematodes:

				Beneficial nematodes eat fleas, grubs, cutworms, thrips, bagworms, and leaf miners in the soil. These nematodes are microscopic but are good predators. These are not to be confused with root-knot nematodes, which are pests.

		c) Chemical Control:

			1. Spinosad:

				Spinosad, sold as Monterey garden insect spray, is derived from soil microbes and does not kill bees or other non-target insects. It just kills the larva. This should be applied at green-up and will have to be reapplied regularly to continue the control. Make sure you coat the top and bottom of the leaves. As the leaf miner chews into the leaf, it consumes the spinosad and gets sick. It then stops feeding and eventually dies.

			2. Pyrethrin:

				This organic pesticide will kill leaf miners as they leave the egg and enter the leaf. Since they have to chew into the leaf, they ingest the poison with the leaf and die. However, pyrethrin also kills good insects such as bee and leaf miner preditors. Use to spot treat concentrations of leaf miners rather than blanket the whole garden with it. Be sure you get it on the bottom side of the leaf.
