Mosaic:
	Description:
		Mosaic disease is a plant disease caused by viruses that cause the leaves of infected plants to have a mottled appearance. Mosaic disease can affect many economically important crops, including tobacco, cassava, beet, cucumber, and alfalfa.

		Mosaic viruses affect a wide variety of horticultural and vegetable crops — roses, beans, tobacco, tomatoes, potatoes, cucumbers, pumpkins, squash, melons, and peppers.

		Mosaic, plant disease caused by various strains of several hundred viruses. A number of economically important crops are susceptible to mosaic infections, including tobacco, cassava, beet, cucumber, and alfalfa. Tulip mosaic virus “breaks” tulip and lily flowers, causing attractive and colourful streaking; this rare, unusual effect drove some of the frenzy of Tulip Mania in the 17th century.

	Types of mosaic viruses and images of how they damage infected plants:
		1. Tobacco Mosaic Virus

		2. Cucumber Mosaic Virus

		3. Tomato Mosaic Virus Found in Tomato Plant

		4. Bean Common Mosaic Virus

		5. Rose Mosaic Virus

	Symptoms:
		1.Yellow, white or green stripes/ streaks/ spots on foliage

		2. Wrinkled, curled, or small leaves

		3.Pronounced yellowing only of veins

		4. Stunted growth and reduced yields

		5. Infected fruit appears mottled and develops raised “warty” areas

		6. dark green blisters

		7. stems that dry out rapidly

		Plant viruses can be difficult to detect as these typical symptoms look similar to other plants with nutrient deficiencies and vary depending on the age of the plant when infection occurs. The virus movement can quickly spread to an entire leaf then the entire plant is taken over by the virus, and ultimately the infection will spread to other plants in the surrounding area.

		Mosaic symptoms are variable but commonly include irregular leaf mottling (light and dark green or yellow patches or streaks). Leaves are commonly stunted, curled, or puckered; veins may be lighter than normal or banded with dark green or yellow. Plants are often dwarfed, with fruit and flowers fewer than usual, deformed, and stunted. Mosaic symptoms may be masked or latent, especially at temperatures above 27 °C (81 °F), and are sometimes confused with nutrient deficiency or herbicide injury. The causal viruses are spread by aphids and other insects, mites, fungi, nematodes, and contact; pollen and seeds can carry the infection as well.

	Prevent Mosaic Virus:
		1) Fungicides will NOT treat this viral disease.

		2) Plant resistant varieties when available or purchase transplants from a reputable source.

		3) Do NOT save seeds from infected crops.

		4) Spot treat with least-toxic, natural pest control products, such as Safer Soap, Bon-Neem, and diatomaceous earth, to reduce the number of disease-carrying insects.

		5) Harvest-Guard® row cover will help keep insect pests off vulnerable crops/ transplants and should be installed until bloom.

		6) Remove all perennial weeds, using least-toxic herbicides, within 100 yards of your garden plot.

		7) The virus can be spread through human activity, tools, and equipment. Frequently wash your hands and disinfect garden tools, stakes, ties, pots, greenhouse benches, etc. (one part bleach to 4 parts water) to reduce the risk of contamination.

		8) Avoid working in the garden during damp conditions (viruses are easily spread when plants are wet).

		9) Avoid using tobacco around susceptible plants. Cigarettes and other tobacco products may be infected and can spread the virus.

		10) Remove and destroy all infected plants (see Fall Garden Cleanup). Do NOT compost.

		Mosaic can be avoided by using virus-free seeds and plants, growing resistant varieties, separating new from old plantings, rotating annuals, and observing stringent sanitation and pest-control measures.