Streak virus:
	Description:
		Maize streak virus (MSV) is a geminivirus that causes maize streak disease (MSVD) in maize and other grasses. MSVD is the third most devastating disease to maize worldwide, after gray leaf spot (GLS) and northern corn leaf blight (NCLB). MSV is found throughout sub-Saharan Africa and is transmitted by leafhoppers in the genus Cicadulina

	Taxonomy:
		The only virus species known to cause MSD is MSV, the type member of the Genus Mastrevirus in the Family Geminiviridae. In addition to the MSV‐A strain, which causes the most severe form of streak disease in maize, 10 other MSV strains (MSV‐B to MSV‐K) are known to infect barley, wheat, oats, rye, sugarcane, millet and many wild, mostly annual, grass species. Seven other mastrevirus species, many with host and geographical ranges partially overlapping those of MSV, appear to infect primarily perennial grasses.

	Physical properties:
		MSV and all related grass mastreviruses have single‐component, circular, single‐stranded DNA genomes of approximately 2700 bases, encapsidated in 22 × 38‐nm geminate particles comprising two incomplete T = 1 icosahedra, with 22 pentameric capsomers composed of a single 32‐kDa capsid protein. Particles are generally stable in buffers of pH 4–8.

	Disease symptoms:
		In infected maize plants, streak disease initially manifests as minute, pale, circular spots on the lowest exposed portion of the youngest leaves. The only leaves that develop symptoms are those formed after infection, with older leaves remaining healthy. As the disease progresses, newer leaves emerge containing streaks up to several millimetres in length along the leaf veins, with primary veins being less affected than secondary or tertiary veins. The streaks are often fused laterally, appearing as narrow, broken, chlorotic stripes, which may extend over the entire length of severely affected leaves. Lesion colour generally varies from white to yellow, with some virus strains causing red pigmentation on maize leaves and abnormal shoot and flower bunching in grasses. Reduced photosynthesis and increased respiration usually lead to a reduction in leaf length and plant height; thus, maize plants infected at an early stage become severely stunted, producing undersized, misshapen cobs or giving no yield at all. Yield loss in susceptible maize is directly related to the time of infection: infected seedlings produce no yield or are killed, whereas plants infected at later times are proportionately less affected.

	Disease control:
		Disease avoidance can be practised by only planting maize during the early season when viral inoculum loads are lowest. Leafhopper vectors can also be controlled with insecticides such as carbofuran. However, the development and use of streak‐resistant cultivars is probably the most effective and economically viable means of preventing streak epidemics. Naturally occurring tolerance to MSV (meaning that, although plants become systemically infected, they do not suffer serious yield losses) has been found, which has primarily been attributed to a single gene, msv‐1. However, other MSV resistance genes also exist and improved resistance has been achieved by concentrating these within individual maize genotypes. Whereas true MSV immunity (meaning that plants cannot be symptomatically infected by the virus) has been achieved in lines that include multiple small‐effect resistance genes together with msv‐1, it has proven difficult to transfer this immunity into commercial maize genotypes. An alternative resistance strategy using genetic engineering is currently being investigated in South Africa.