Leaf Beetle:
	Description:
		Leaf beetles, also known as chrysomelid beetles, are a family of beetles that eat leaves and other plant parts, and are commonly found on foliage. They are one of the largest groups of beetles, with over 37,000 species in more than 2,500 genera. Many species of leaf beetle feed on specific species of plant
		Leaf beetles are most active from late spring and summer. The life cycle takes about 2 months, and several generations can occur per year. Eggs are laid in the soil surface. Larvae feed on roots of grass species and pupate in the soil.

	Identification:
		Adult leaf beetles are oblong to oval and have threadlike antennae. The coloration of some leaf beetles blends with the color of leaves. Other species are brightly colored and contrastingly marked so they are easy to observe on foliage. Adult leaf beetles are generally less than 1/3 inch long. Adult flea beetles are smaller and commonly about 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) long.

		Flea beetles are usually blackish or a dark, shiny metallic color. Adults frequently jump when disturbed, which is the source of their common name. Larger species of leaf beetles may drop from foliage when disturbed. Several common species are pictured and sometimes discussed at the links below.

	Life cycle:
		Leaf beetles develop through four life stages: egg, larva, pupa, and adult. After hatching from eggs that are generally laid on host foliage, the larvae develop through three increasingly larger instars. Pupation commonly occurs on the ground near the base of host plants. Overwintering is typically as adults in protected places. Most species of leaf beetles including flea beetles have several generations per year.

	Damage:
		Adult leaf beetles chew and feed on foliage and cause ragged leaves and sometimes premature drop of foliage. Adult flea beetles cause pits and small holes in leaves and cause the immediately surrounding tissue to become bleached or whitish. Heavy feeding can kill seedings.

		Leaf beetle larvae chew all the way through foliage or scrape the foliage, giving leaves a windowpanelike appearance. Larvae of flea beetles generally feed on or inside roots or stems. Adults and species with foliage-feeding larvae leave dark feces (excrement) on infested leaves. Heavy larval feeding can kill germinating seeds and seedlings.

		When melons and vegetables are fed upon, especially the underground parts, plants can become more susceptible to various plant pathogens. Cucumber beetles can vector various plant viruses that cause cucurbit diseases. When potato tubers are infested by flea beetles the potatoes can become inedible.

	Solutions:
		Provide good growing conditions and proper cultural care to keep plants vigorous so they are more tolerant of pest damage. Control weeds near valued plants because cucumber beetles and flea beetles feed on various weeds and can move from these alternative hosts to feed on melons and vegetables.

		When growing melons and vegetables susceptible to cucumber beetles and flea beetles, covering plants with fine screening or mesh cloth before the seedlings emerge or immediately after transplanting can exclude these pests. Hold the covering above the surface of plants, such as by using hoops or stakes. Exclusion is of greatest importance when plants are young. Depending on the host and beetle species, covers can be removed once plants become well established.

		Where damage is intolerable, beetles on foliage can be reduced by directly spraying the insects with insecticidal soap. Host foliage can be sprayed with a pyrethroid, such as bifenthrin, or spinosad, which have some residual persistence. Applying a systemic neonicotinoid such as imidacloprid can control both adults and root-feeding larvae. Check product labels before use to ensure the target crop or site is listed. Some insecticides cannot be applied to food crops. Except for insecticidal soap, these insecticides can be toxic to bees and parasitoids and predators of pests. Do not apply them to plants that are flowering or wait until evening when honey bees are no longer active.

		Adapted from the publications linked above and Pests of Landscape Trees and Shrubs: An Integrated Pest Management Guide and Pests of the Garden and Small Farm: A Grower's Guide to Using Less Pesticide, University of California Statewide Integrated Pest Management Program (UC IPM).
